# Active Learning for Text Classification and Fake News Detection

The paper was presented on ECNLPIR conference and rated with the best PhD student paper award. The participation certificate and the best student paper certificate are in the folder. 

The original project folder can be found [here](https://github.com/sahanmar/Peony/tree/master/Peony_article/active_learning_for_text_classification) 

## Abstract

Supervised classification of texts relies on the availability of reliable class labels for the training data. However, the process of collecting data labels can be complex and costly. A standard procedure is to add labels sequentially by querying an annotator until reaching satisfactory performance. Active learning is a process of selecting unlabeled data records for which the knowledge of the label would bring the highest discriminability of the dataset. In this paper, we provide a comparative study of various active learning strategies for different embeddings of the text on various datasets. We focus on Bayesian active learning methods that are used due to their ability to represent the uncertainty of the classification procedure. We compare three types of uncertainty representation: i) SGLD, ii) Dropout, and iii) deep ensembles. The latter two methods in cold- and warm-start versions. The texts were embedded using Fast Text, LASER, and RoBERTa encoding techniques. The methods are tested on two types of datasets, text categorization (Kaggle News Category and Twitter Sentiment140 dataset) and fake news detection (Kaggle Fake News and Fake News Detection datasets). We show that the conventional dropout Monte Carlo approach provides good results for the majority of the tasks. The ensemble methods provide more accurate representation of uncertainty that allows to keep the pace of learning of a complicated problem for the growing number of requests, outperforming the dropout in the long run. However, for the majority of the datasets the active strategy using Dropout MC and Deep Ensembles achieved almost perfect performance even for a very low number of requests. The best results were obtained for the most recent embeddings RoBERTa